---
layout: post
title: Modernism as Therapy
---

## Modernism as Therapy: Exploring Therapeutic Writing Elements in Literature Inspired by the Great War 

### Introduction 
    Modernism, writing inspired thematically by the Great War and the shift away from Romantic writing in the collective public mindset, is one of the greatest genres of writing in history. Larabee describes it as a period where, “certain cultural imperatives […]were then subsumed into the works of fiction and articulated through them,” (176). However, beyond being a poignant representation of a cultural shift for readers, it also serves a deeply important purpose for the authors themselves. Rather than looking at modernist literature as something to consume, we will examine it as writing that provided a potentially therapeutic experience especially for authors who brought their direct experiences from the Great War to their authorship. In order to examine the possibility of writing as therapy for Modernists, this research will select a pair of authors, T.S. Elliot and Virginia Woolf, whose literature contains depictions or relevant content (either metaphorically or literally) to the Great War. These works will be examined in the context of what we know about writing as therapy and whether the potential exists for the modernist movement to be a kind of therapeutic experience for the authors who crafted literature of this period. 

### Historical Review 
    In order to understand the conceptual framework, we will first examine what kind of traumas might need therapeutic release in this period. Thus, a historical review of shell-shock and PTSD in the Great War is necessary. The term Shellshock was “applied to some of the most important psychiatric and neurological problems of the recent war,” (Southard, 1). However, the reality of Shell Shock included “symptoms of a very large number,” that doctors didn’t really understand (Southard, 2). It was a new kind of malady-- a psychological effect that was unprecedented in previous wars. Originally seen as a result of the brain being shaken within the skull, inducing an injury for which a soldier could be released on a pension, the definition of shell shock increased within the space of one year. “Many soldiers exhibiting the characteristic symptoms—trembling “rather like a jelly shaking”; headache; tinnitus, or ringing in the ear; dizziness; poor concentration; confusion; loss of memory; and disorders of sleep” had not spent any time near exploding shells (Alexander). This new condition, sharing symptoms with the more “physical” version of shell shock was termed “neurasthenia,” or “a nervous breakdown precipitated by the dreadful stress of war,” (Alexander). A report from the English War Office at the end of the Great War listed that of the two sub-types of shell shock, concussive injury made up only 5-10% of all cases. Rather, the emotional shell shock, a direct result of the horror of the war, made up more than 90% of the cases (Alexander). This second kind of shell shock is particularly key to both Elliot and Woolf, who neither experienced any part of the combat in the Great War, however both were left with the repercussions of the “dreadful stress of war.” 

### Literature Review: Writing and PTSD 
    The concept of using writing, specifically expressive writing as a kind of therapy began in 1986 by researchers Pennebaker and Beall (1986). Their work exposed that “written expression of cognitions and affect associated with stressful and traumatic life events improves physical and psychological health,” (Sloan and Marx, 1).  Since then, there have been hundreds of studies on the psychological benefits of expressive writing including studies on those suffering from medical trauma, physical impairments, and psychological disorders. Researchers Sloan and Marx conducted multiple studies on the particular effect that expressive writing might have on those suffering from PTSD. Their work suggests that several factors are key to the success of writing as a method of therapy: multiple writing sessions and longer writing sessions are important for positive results. The other key is that “it is important to write about the details of the traumatic event” as well as “thoughts and emotions” that were experienced during the event (Sloan and Marx, 2).  
    
    The findings of these more modern studies show that patients engaging in writing-as-therapy find writing “highly tolerable” as a method to confront traumatic memories (Sloan and Marx, 3). It is believed that this tolerability is due to the limited length of time the patient needs to spend with the treatment, and that since the confrontation of the trauma is immediate, this prevents “the buildup of apprehensive anxiety”(Sloan and Marx, 3). Finally many patients were reported to be relieved that the sharing of their trauma was less personal via the written format, thus allowing for more comfort in the expression of difficult traumas and emotions.   

### Modernism: A Written Response to Trauma 
    If we look at works of early modernist literature, it is undeniable that the Great War is clearly an instigating element in the sudden shift in literary style. According to Santianez, the Great War “truly demonstrated the poverty of language for conveying the experience of modern warfare,” (2). The scope of violence in the Great war created “a crisis of meaning” as survivors (civilian and veteran alike) found themselves “baffled and traumatized by the magnitude of the tragedy,” (Santianez, 3). A new literary genre was born in the search for a way to “represent an experience lived and perceived by many as unspeakable, unaccountable, incommunicable,” (Santaiez, 3). Two works that stood at the forefront of this exploration of the post-war reality were T. S. Eliot’s The Waste Land (1922) and Virginia Woolfe’s Mrs. Dalloway (1925). Both of these works provide a different look at a post-war world from a unique perspective.  

    In order to determine if Elliot and Woolf are engaging in a kind of genre-specific expressive writing for therapeutic purposes, we will examine their writing for particular concepts that we saw set out by Sloan and Marx as successful to therapeutic writing: Are there examples of direct references to a traumatic event relevant to the author? Are there distinct emotional examinations of the event through director or metaphorical language? These things, according to modern psychology, would indicate some therapeutic purpose to the writer. However, two things must be clarified: This research does not claim these authors had PTSD, and this research does not claim that the therapeutic writing was intentional. Both of those claims are for the authors alone to make, and since we cannot ask them, we dare not assume. However, this research imagines that if a story or poem is so poignant in the mind of the author that it demands writing, some intentional attempt at catharsis might be theorized. 

### T.S.Eliot 
    In order to examine how post-war Modernist authors might have used writing as a form of personal therapy, we must first explore their personal histories. This review will begin with T.S. Eliot. He was born September 26, 1888, St. Louis, Missouri. He was an American-English poet, known as one of the forerunners of Modernism. He was also a well-established literary critic (Davies). He did not serve in the war himself, having been rejected by the Navy for health concerns. However, he kept close tabs on the war, and in order to create something as poignant as his poem The Waste Land, he certainly had experienced, at least in the civilian sense, some of the real horrors of the Great War. There is evidence of this in his letter to the weekly news magazine called “The Nation” in 1917, where he provides a letter from an unnamed soldier that gives a harrowing description of the realities of war. This account is theorized by scholars to be from Elliot’s brother-in-law Maurice Haigh-Wood. This means such imagery would be particularly important to Elliot as something experienced by a member of his own family, and perhaps serve as a source of inspiration for his own work. The letter expresses the war as:  

        "…a picture of a leprous earth, scattered with the swollen and blackening corpses of hundreds of young men. [...]stench of rotting carrion, mingled with the sickening smell of exploded lyddite and ammonal. [...] Wounded men lying in the shell holes among the decaying corpses: helpless under the scorching sun and bitter nights, under repeated shelling. Men with bowels dropping out, lungs shot away, with blinded smashed faces, or limbs blown into space. [...] Wounded men laughing in agony on the barbed wire, until a friendly spout of liquid fire shrivels them up like a fly in a candle," (Allatini).  
 
    Beyond letters, Elliot would have had horrifying experiences of bombing, returning soldiers, and the decaying world that was left in the wake of the war. These themes all appear in his writing, and are all traumatic in their own way -- things that he may not have been able to process without writing them down.  

    Looking, now, at Elliot’s The Waste Land (1922), we find a lengthy poem consisting of 432 lines which exposes via metaphor the devastation of the Great War. According to Bennet it “explores the broken world of England following the impact of World War One,” (Bennett, 4), a reality with which Elliot was all-too familiar. It is clear from the imagery of the poem that Elliot is taking inspiration from the horrors he experienced second-hand via memoirs and letters and his own experiences in London post-war. Bennett notes that Elliot’s work creates a sense of the “power of memory as a tool to overcome the disillusionment caused by [...] the brutal reality of World War One,” (Bennett, 4). In essence, that in creating a space to remember the horror, Elliot has created a method to overcome that same horror -- very like the methodology used in therapeutic writing. 

    The two aspects of good therapeutic writing that we want to look for: an expression of reality, and emotional exploration are both present in The Waste Land. We will begin with expression of Elliot’s personal experiences. In one example, Elliot describes a post-war London and the return of the dead:  

Unreal City, 
Under the brown fog of a winter dawn, 
A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many, 
I had not thought death had undone so many.  (61-64) 

    Here, Elliot uses the “crowd” flowing over the bridge as an expression of the sheer number of bodies -- an uncountable crowd which death had “undone,” (63 &64). It would have been an unimaginable part of history to witness, and yet Elliot found a way to get it down on paper, get it out of his mind, and into the imaginations and memories of his readers, providing a perfect example of writing about a realistic event.  

    A second example of this reflection of Elliot’s lived reality is in lines 193-195. Here he is discussing the Thames, but it also provides a distinct allegory referencing the trenches. It also seems to call directly to the notions expressed in the Letter to “The Nation,” where the horror, death, and reality of gruesome bodies on the war-front is expressed in the poem:  
White bodies naked on the low damp ground 
And bones cast in a little low dry garret, 
Rattled by the rat’s foot only, year to year. (Elliot, 193-195). 
 
    By providing this, Elliot expresses both sides of his experience, his personal is shown in the depictions of London across the poem, but this section (193-195) offers a peek into the perspectives he was privy to through memoirs, personal narratives, and letters. He found a way to express the trauma of both of those parts of his wartime experience in The Waste Land.  

    The second aspect of good therapeutic writing, the expression of emotions, is also apparent in Elliot’s The Waste Land in the first six lines:  
April is the cruellest month, breeding 
Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing 
Memory and desire, stirring 
Dull roots with spring rain. 
Winter kept us warm, covering 
Earth in forgetful snow, (1-6). 
    In these six lines alone we have three uses of the language of emotion: “cruellest,” “desire,” and “Forgetful,” which already fulfills the requirement of emotional exploration for therapeutic writing. However, if we delve into the meaning of these as the opening of a poem on the horrors of the Great War, the emotions that Elliot is exploring are even more poignant. The lines explore the notion of spring as “cruel” since the memory of the war is “Stirring” where winter, likely the end of the war in cold November, kept the horror of the war “warm” or preserved by the “forgetful” snow, which buried those horrors for a time. Either way, the spring shears away that comfort, forcing the reality of the war covered by the icy frost back to the surface. With this context, especially, we can see how Elliot’s writing might be a kind of catharsis for his experience -- especially if his expectation at war’s end was for a return to the normal, and instead the horror only grew worse as understanding of the devastation came to the surface, like “Lilacs out of the dead land,” (Elliot, 2).  
 
### Virginia Woolf 
    Virginia Woolf was another prominent author in modernist literature. She was born in 1881 to a wealthy intellectual family. She married a Jewish author Leonard Woolf and they worked together to create a publishing house where many works from Great War soldiers were printed, some posthumously. Despite her well-known struggles with mental health which caused her death in 1941, “Woolf is best known for her novels, which represent the peak of British modernist “stream-of-consciousness” style, characterized by the representation of characters’ inner thoughts,” (Cersonsky). She captured much of the essence of British modernism, and, in so doing, also worked through some of her war-time trauma through writing.  

    While, like Elliot, Woolf didn’t experience war on the front, she still had her own experiences both personally and through her Brother-in-law, Philip Woolf. Virginia Woolf survived the Great War as a civilian. This meant she had memories of bombing raids, and the constant fear of attack. She and her husband, Leonard, escaped personal injury for the duration of the war, however, two of Leonard’s brothers, Cecil and Philip, both fought on the warfront. Despite being safe themselves, the Woolf couple was rocked by tragedy and loss when the youngest, Cecil, was killed in action in December of 1917. While this event would have been traumatizing to the whole family, it was especially so to Second Lieutenant Philip Woolf, who “had been wounded on the front by the same shell that fatally injured his brother Cecil,” (Levenback, 71). Philip was sent home to convalesce in a hospital in London where Woolf would visit him before his return to the warfront. Thus, despite having no ‘field trauma’ herself, she encountered injuries, mindsets, and horrors beyond imagination through her brother-in-law.  

    On top of shell shock, Woolf recorded in notes that Philip seemed to be suffering from survival guilt symptoms. “Virginia Woolf observed with concern that Philip was "wretched" and eager to return to France and it was only with his end in view that Leonard reported him "more cheerful than he had been before." (Levenback, 73) So the ideology surrounding wartime injuries, survivor’s guilt, and shell shock was a topic near to Woolf, and something that clearly stuck with her post-war.If we are to claim that Virginia Woolf used modernism as a kind of therapy for her experiences with the Great War, we must examine her writing itself to see if her traumas: —working to fit in her civilian experience with those of the injured soldiers and trying to understand a horror she encountered via others—appear in her writing. 

    Mrs. Dalloway was published in 1925. At face value, the novel follows the character of Clarissa Dalloway, as she plans a dinner party.  Mrs. Dalloway explores a single day in downtown London, following multiple perspectives including Clarissa, Septimus Warren Smith, a war veteran clearly suffering from the lasting psychological effects of shell shock, and his wife. By interweaving the two narratives, the civilian and the veteran, Woolf gives the readers a look at the different ways modernism can explore the psychological effect of a post-war environment on different groups of people -- similar to the way Woolf herself would have experienced the war.  

    When looking for the two aspects of good psychological  writing to fulfill the concept that this might be a therapeutic kind of writing: A discussion of the writer’s trauma as an event, and the discussion of the emotions that relate to the trauma, we do find evidence of both in Mrs. Dalloway (Sloan & Marx). The novel expresses two of Woolf’s potential traumas: Her struggle with mental health, in the character of Clarisse, and the helplessness of the veteran seen in Septimus Warren Smith. For the purposes of war-trauma and therapy, we will focus on Septimus, however it is important to note that there may also be similar emotional benefit to Woolf by writing a character like Clarissa who reflected her own civilian aspect and her own mental health struggles.  
    Septimus Warren Smith is a particularly poignant character. His arc begins as having recently returned from Italy. He is physically recovered, but he continues to see a ‘ghost’ of his friend in visions as well as experiencing hyper-alertness, anxious spells, bursts of anger, tremors, and nightmares -- all hallmarks of untreated shell shock. Septimus struggles with finding a doctor who will treat his shell shock with any seriousness and finally he takes his own life by jumping out of a window. Thus Mrs. Dalloway "calls attention to the condition of a returning soldier, something particularly relevant to Woolf’s personal history and experience with the war (Levenback, 75). 

    Septimus’ struggle was one often experienced by Veterans. His wartime experiences were summarized in Mrs. Dalloway as:  

        Septimus was one of the first to volunteer. He went to France to save an England which consisted almost entirely of Shakespeare's plays and Miss Isabel Pole in a green dress walking in a square. There in the trenches the change which Mr. Brewer desired when he advised that football was produced instantly; he developed manliness; he was promoted, (62).  
 
    The ideology presented in this directly exploration of Septimus’ trauma is a thought process that the general public seemed to collectively accept about soldiers who fought in the Great War; however, the soldiers’ illness from shellshock was less openly recognized. This is something Woolf would have known by visiting her brother-in-law. While he was cleared for duty, despite his trauma, many others remained in the hospital, struggling with wounds and mental injuries that would never really heal. Septimus’ character reflects the traumatic realization that Woolf had -- that her experience of the war, horrible as it was, would never be the same as the soldiers’. If this wasn’t enough, it is fascinating to note that the character of Septimus Warren Smith is shockingly similar to her brother-in-law: a returning soldier haunted by the death of a person close to him by explosive force. Scholar Levenback argues that the “returning soldier in Mrs. Dalloway [is] particularly representative of Philip Woolf,” (Levenback, 74). In the park scene we see Mrs. Smith musing on her husband in a way that is particularly relevant to Woolf’s experiences with Philip: “She must go back and tell him, go back to him sitting there on the green chair under the tree, talking to himself, or to that dead man Evans,”(Woolf, 47). Woolf offers the readers another civilian female perspective, but this time one arguably closer to her experiences with Philip and herself: a woman who experienced civilian life and a returned soldier who does not understand how to reintegrate into society. Here, we see how “Mrs. Dalloway [...] reveals just how much the struggles of [Philip] influenced [Woolf's] thinking about the effects of war,” or rather, we see a direct depiction in writing of one of Woolf’s personal traumas (Levenback, 74). Thus there is at least one part of the therapeutic writing practice that is fulfilled by Mrs. Dalloway. 

    The second key aspect of writing for therapeutic purposes is the exploration of the emotions surrounding the traumatic event. We see Woolf do this throughout Mrs. Dalloway as emotional and metaphorical language is key to the stylistic qualities of Modernism. However, there are two particular instances which demonstrate a possibility that Woolf is using this writing to explore her trauma therapeutically. First, the way in which Septimus’ explores his emotional responses to his trauma, and second how Clarissa examines her emotions regarding the nature of Septimus’ final choice. 

    One of the most poignant scenes of Septimus exploring his own feelings is when he thinks back in a congratulatory manner at the way he didn’t feel -- a hallmark of a trauma response:  

        Septimus, far from showing any emotion or recognizing that here was the end of a friendship, congratulated himself upon feeling very little and very reasonably. The War had taught him. It was sublime. He had gone through the whole show, friendship, European War, death, had won promotion, was still under thirty and was bound to survive. He was right there. The last shells missed him. He watched them explode with indifference, (62).  

    This emotional exploration shows not only that Septimus is exploring these feelings, which is effective for the reader to understand this perspective, but it also shows that Woolf is examining these feelings from the perspectives she was privy to because of Philip. It is particularly important to note that Woolf has Septimus exploring his trauma via writing. Woolf “gives reality to his "revelations'' by writing them down (Woolf, 47), the only combatant character in Woolf to do so, perhaps implying a relation to the war poets, who also wrote,” out their feelings about the war in this manner (Levenback, 78). 

    The second place that Woolf really capitalizes on the emotional nature of modernism to explore feelings that could be attributed to her past experiences and traumas regarding the Great War, is how Woolf characterizes Clarissa’s thoughts about Septimus at the end of the novel. While musing about his suicide, she expresses both emotional and physical aspects of panic and distress in a way that is deeply personal: “Always her body went through it first, when she was told, suddenly, of an accident; her dress flamed, her body burnt,” (131). She continues, using more distinct emotional language that ties Clarissa to what might have been Woolf’s personal experience as a civilian of decent status in the aftermath of the Great War. “It was her punishment to see sink and disappear here a man, there a woman, in this profound darkness, and she forced to stand here in her evening dress,” (132). Through these two quotes we can see how Clarissa’s character reacts to the reality Septimus was feeling. The emotional language indiecates she has start to understand, feel some of the panic and mania Septimus must have felt with the “dress flamed” comment, and she ends by appreciating his choice -- the only person in the book to express any understanding for Septimus, which creates this beautiful moment of emotional exploration, both for Clarissa, and hopefully for the author as she writes out a sense of emotional understanding for the things she witnessed. Though Woolf’s brother-in-law did not take his own life, Woolf understood the plight of returned soldiers and explored the emotional ramifications of that understanding in her writing.   

### Conclusion 
    While it is not possible to claim definitively that Elliot or Woolf received any kind of catharsis from their writing, the features of their respective works reflect therapeutic effect as a distinct possibility. By looking for features of direct discussion of traumatic events along with the emotional exploration of those events, it is possible to see the psychology at work in both Elliot and Woolf’s post-war literature. It is impossible to come out of an event like the Great War unscathed, whether the author’s experience was to watch the dead come home in droves or read horrifying letters of the realities of war like Elliot, or like Woolf, to experience shell shock as a bystander and face the realities of changed men coming back from the warfront like Woolf, there is great need for a kind of catharsis. Modernism as a literary style was created in response to the horror of the Great War, and if such a drastic change in literature is warranted by the unprecedented nature of the post-war climate, then it is perfectly reasonable to examine the literature’s potential psychological benefits. While at face value, the literature can seem dark or demanding psychologically, it is important to remember that the personal nature of expository writing for psychological benefit does not shy away from the trauma of the event nor the emotional cost. It is clear that whether intentional or not, modernists created a kind of literature-bound therapy to express the turmoil of emotions they experienced after the Great War, and the work exemplified by Elliot and Woolf only bolsters that viewpoint.  
 
### Works Cited 
Allatini, Rose. “T.S.Eliot’s Letter to “The Nation”: A paper given at the American Modernism conference at Brookes University” Brooks   University.  2006 https://greatwarfiction.wordpress.com/tseliots-letter-to-the-nation/  

Alexander, Caroline. “The Shock of War.” Smithsonian, 2010. https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/the-shock-of-war-55376701/  

Bennett, Matthew. “The Roadmap: exploring T.S. Eliot’s The Waste Land with World War One literature.” Undergraduate Honors Theses. Paper 545. https://dc.etsu.edu/honors/545  

Cersonsky, Emily. “Virginia Woolf.” Columbia University. 2021.  

https://www.college.columbia.edu/core/content/virginia-woolf 
Davies, Hugh A. “T.S. Elliot: American-English poet, playwright, and literary critic.” Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/biography/T-S-Eliot 

Elliot, T.S “The Waste Land.” The Poetry Foundation. 1922. https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/47311/the-waste-land  

Larabee, Mark D.  “Front Lines of Modernism.” 2011. 244 pp. ISBN 978-0-230-108080-0 

Levenback, Karen L. “Virginia Woolf and Returning Soldiers: The Great War and the Reality of Survival in "Mrs. Dalloway" and "The Years".” Woolf Studies Annual Vol. 2 (1996), pp. 71-88. https://www.jstor.org/stable/24906392?read-now=1&seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents 
Lynch, Suzanne. “Out of the wasteland: the first World War and modernism: The evolution of modernist literature was intimately bound up with the shock and devastation of the war.” The Irish Times, 2015. https://www.irishtimes.com/culture/heritage/out-of-the-wasteland-the-first-world-war-and-modernism-1.2190829 

Sloan, Denise M. and Brian P. Marx. “Maximizing outcomes associated with expressive writing.” Wiley. 2017. DOI: 10.1111/cpsp.12231 
Southard, E. E. “Shell-Shock and other neuropsychiatry problems.” War Literature 1914-1918. https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/52105/pg52105-images.html 

Woolf, Virginia. Mrs. Dalloway. 1925. https://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks02/0200991h.html  